On recalling ANT




Bruno Latour
Abstract

   The paper explores one after the other the four difficulties of actor-
   network theory, that is the words 'actor', 'network' and 'theory'—without
   forgetting the hyphen. It tries to refocus the originality of what is more a
   method to deploy the actor's own world building activities than an alter-
   native social theory. Finally, it sketches some of its remaining potential.

I will start by saying that there are four things that do not work
with actor-network theory; the word actor, the word network, the
word theory and the hyphen! Four nails in the coffin.
   The first nail in the coffin is I guess the word 'network', as John
Law indicates in his paper in this volume. This is the great danger of
using a technical metaphor slightly ahead of everyone's common
use. Now that the World Wide Web exists, everyone believes they
understand what a network is. While twenty years ago there was still
some freshness in the term as a critical tool against notions as
diverse as institution, society, nation-state and, more generally, any
flat surface, it has lost any cutting edge and is now the pet notion of
all those who want to modernize modernization. 'Down with rigid
institutions,' they all say, 'long live flexible networks.'
   What is the difference between the older and the new usage? At
the time, the word network, like Deleuze's and Guattari's term rhi-
zome, clearly meant a series of transformations—translations, trans-
ductions—which could not be captured by any of the traditional
terms of social theory. With the new popularization of the word net-
work, it now means transport without deformation, an instanta-
neous, unmediated access to every piece of information. That is
exactly the opposite of what we meant. What I would like to call
'double click information' has killed the last bit of the critical
O The Editorial Board of The Sociological Review 1999. Published by Blackwell Publishers,
108 Cowley Road. Oxford OX4 1JF, UK and 350 Main Street, Maiden, MA 02148, USA.
Bruno Latour
 cutting edge of the notion of network. I don't think we should use it
 anymore at least not to mean the type of transformations and trans-
 lations that we want now to explore.
    The second nail that I'd like to hammer into the coffin is the word
 'actor' in its hyphenated connection with the notion of 'network'.
 From day one, I objected to the hyphen because inevitably it would
 remind sociologists of the agency/structure cliche, or, as we say in
 French, of the 'pont aux ones' of social theory. Most of the misun-
 derstandings about ANT have come from this coupling of terms,
 one that is much too similar to the traditional divides of social
 theory.
    The managerial, engineering, Machiavellian, demiurgic character
 of ANT has been criticised many times. More exactly, critiques have
 alternated, quite predictably, between the two hyphenated poles:
 one type of critique has turned around the actor, the other turned
 around the network. The first line of criticism has insisted on the
 Schumpeterian, male-like, hairy gorilla-like character of ANT; the
 second line of criticism has focused instead on the dissolution of
humanity proposed by ANT into a field of forces where morality,
humanity, psychology was absent. Thus, the actor-network was split
into two: demiurgy on one side; 'death of Man' on the other.
    No matter how prepared I am to criticise the theory, I still think
that these two symmetrical critiques are off target even though the
very expression of 'actor-network' invites this reaction. The original
idea was not to occupy a position in the agency/structure debate,
not even to overcome this contradiction. Contradictions, most of the
time and especially when they are related to the modernist predica-
ment, should not be overcome, but simply ignored or bypassed. But
I agree that the hyphenated term made it impossible to see clearly
the bypass operation that had been attempted.
    Let me try to refocus the argument. Let us abandon the words
'actor' and 'network' for a moment and pay some attention to two
operations, one offraming (see the chapter in this volume by Michel
Callon) and one of summing up.
   It is not exactly true that social sciences have always alternated
between actor and system, or agency and structure. It might be
more productive to say that they have alternated between two types
of equally powerful dissatisfactions: when social scientists concen-
trate on what could be called the micro level, that is face to face
interactions, local sites, they quickly realize that many of elements
necessary to make sense of the situation are already in place or are
coming from far away; hence, this urge to look for something else,

16                           © The Editorial Board of The Sociological Review 1999
                                                        On recalling ANT

 some other level, and to concentrate on what is not directly visible
 in the situation but has made the situation what it is. This is why so
 much work has been dedicated to notions such as society, norms,
 values, culture, structure, social context, all terms that aim at desig-
 nating what gives shape to micro interaction. But then, once this
 new level has been reached, a second type of dissatisfaction begins.
 Social scientists now feel that something is missing, that the abstrac-
 tion of terms like culture and structure, norms and values, seems
 too great, and that one needs to reconnect, through an opposite
move, back to the flesh-and-blood local situations from which they
had started. Once back to the local sites, however, the same uneasi-
ness that pushed them in the direction of a search for social struc-
ture quickly sets in. Social scientists soon realize that the local
situation is exactly as abstract as the so called 'macro' one from
which they came and they now want to leave it again for what holds
the situation together. And so on ad infinitum.
    It seems to me that ANT is simply a way of paying attention to
these two dissatisfactions, not again to overcome them or to solve
the problem, but to follow them elsewhere and to try to explore the
very conditions that make these two opposite disappointments pos-
sible. By topicalizing the social sciences' own controversies. ANT
might have hit on one of the very phenomena of the social order:
may be the social possesses the bizarre property of not being made
of agency and structure at all, but rather of being a circulating
entity. The double dissatisfaction that has triggered so much of the
conceptual agitation of the social sciences in the past would thus be
an artefact: the result of trying to picture a trajectory, a movement,
by using oppositions between two notions, micro and macro, indi-
vidual and structure, which have nothing to do with it.
    If this bypassing strategy is accepted then perhaps a few things
are clarified: ANT concentrates attention on a movement—a move-
ment well demonstrated by the successive shifts of attention of the
dissatisfied social scientist. This movement has many peculiar fea-
tures. The first one is the redescription of what was earlier perceived
as having to do with the macro-social. As it has been understood
even, I think, by the harshest critics of ANT, the network pole of
actor-network does not aim at all at designating a Society, the Big
Animal that makes sense of local interactions. Neither does it desig-
nate an anonymous field of forces. Instead it refers to something
entirely different which is the summing up of interactions through
various kinds of devices, inscriptions, forms and formulae, into a
very local, very practical, very tiny locus. This is now well known

O The Editorial Board of The Sociological Review 1999                17
Bruno Latour

 through the study of accounting, managerial practice (Power, 1995),
 organization studies (Czamiawska, 1997), some sociolinguistics
 (Taylor, 1993), panoptica (or what I now call 'oligoptica', Latour
 and Hermant, 1998), economics, the anthropology of markets, and
 so on. Big does not mean 'really' big or 'overall', or 'overarching',
 but connected, blind, local, mediated, related. This is already an
 important contribution of ANT since it means that when one
 explores the structures of the social, one is not led away from the
 local sites—as it was the case with the dissatisfied social scientist—
 but closer to them.
    The second consequence is less well developed but equally impor-
 tant: actantiality is not what an actor does—with its consequence
 for the demiurgic version of ANT—but what provides actants with
 their actions, with their subjectivity, with their intentionality, with
 their morality. When you hook up with this circulating entity, then
 you are partially provided with consciousness, subjectivity, actorial-
 ity, etc. There is no reason to alternate between a conception of
 social order as made of a Society and another one obtained from
 the stochastic composition of individual atoms. To become an actor
 is as much a local achievement as obtaining a 'total' structure. I will
 come back to this aspect in a moment, but the consequence is
 already important: there is nothing especially local, and nothing
 especially human, in a local intersubjective encounter. I have pro-
 posed 'interobjectivity' as a way of phrasing the new position of the
 actor (Latour, 1996).
    The third and very puzzling consequence is that, by following the
movement allowed by ANT, we are never led to study social order,
in a displacement that would allow an observer to zoom from the
global to the local and back. In the social domain there is no
change of scale. It is so to speak always flat and folded and this is
especially true of the natural sciences that are said to provide the
context, the frame, the global environment in which society is sup-
posed to be located. Contexts too flow locally through networks, be
these geography, medicine, statistics, economics, or even sociology.
This is where ANT has used the insights of sociology of science—
including of course the sociology of the social sciences—as much as
possible: economies emerge out of economics; societies out of soci-
ologies; cultures out of anthropologies; etc. The topology of the
social, John Law is right, is rather bizarre, but I don't think it is
fractal. Each locus can be seen as framing and summing up. 'Actor'
is not here to play the role of agency and 'network' to play the role
of society. Actor and network—if we want to still use those terms—

18                            O The Editorial Board of The Sociological Review 1999
                                                        On recalling ANT

  designates two faces of the same phenomenon, like waves and parti-
  cles, the slow realization that the social is a certain type of circula-
  tion that can travel endlessly without ever encountering either the
  micro-level—there is never an interaction that is not framed—or the
 macro-level—there are only local summing up which produce either
  local totalities ('oligoptica') or total localities (agencies).
     To have transformed the social from what was a surface, a terri-
 tory, a province of reality, into a circulation, is what I think has
 been the most useful contribution of ANT. It is, I agree, a largely
 negative contribution, because it has simply rendered us sensitive to
 a fourth consequence which is also the most bizarre: if there is no
 zoom going from macro structure to micro interactions, if both
 micro and macro are local effects of hooking up to circulating enti-
 ties, if contexts flow inside narrow conduits, it means that there is
 plenty of 'space' in between the tiny trajectories of what could be
called the local productions of 'phusigenics', 'sociogenics' and
 'psychogenics'.
     'Nature', 'Society', 'Subjectivity' do not define what the world is
like, but what circulates locally and to which one 'subscribes' much
as we subscribe to cable TV and sewers—including of course the
subscription that allows us to say 'we' and 'one'. This empty space
'in between' the networks, those terra incognita are the most exciting
aspects of ANT because they show the extent of our ignorance and
the immense reserve that is open for change. But the benefit that can
be drawn from this vast empty space 'in between' network trajecto-
ries is not clear yet because of a third difficulty that I now have to
tackle.
    The third nail in the coffin is the word theory. As Mike Lynch
said some time ago, ANT should really be called 'actant-rhizome
ontology'. But who would have cared for such a horrible mouthful
of words—not to mention the acronym 'ARO'? Yet, Lynch has a
point. If it is a theory, of what it is a theory?
    It was never a theory of what the social is made of, contrary to
the reading of many sociologists who believed it was one more
school trying to explain the behaviour of social actors. For us, ANT
was simply another way of being faithful to the insights of eth-
nomethodology: actors know what they do and we have to learn
from them not only what they do, but how and why they do it. It is
us, the social scientists, who lack knowledge of what they do, and
not they who are missing the explanation of why they are unwit-
tingly manipulated by forces exterior to themselves and known to
the social scientist's powerful gaze and methods. ANT is a way of

O The Editorial Board of The Sociological Review 1999                19
Bruno Latour
delegitimating the incredible pretensions of sociologists who, to use
Bauman's forceful expression (Bauman, 1992), want to act as legis­
lators and to open yet another space for interpretive sociology. Far
from being a theory of the social or even worse an explanation of
what makes society exert pressure on actors, it always was, and this
from its very inception (Callon and Latour, 1981), a very crude
method to learn from the actors without imposing on them an a
priori definition of their world-building capacities. The ridiculous
poverty of the ANT vocabulary—association, translation, alliance,
obligatory passage point, etc.—was a clear signal that none of these
words could replace the rich vocabulary of the actor's practice, but
was simply a way to systematically avoid replacing their sociology,
their metaphysics and their ontology with those of the social scien­
tists who were connecting with them through some research proto­
col—I use this cumbersome circumlocution to avoid the loaded
term 'studying', because ANT researchers cannot exactly be said to
'study' the other social actors.
   I agree that we have not always been true to the original task, and
that a great deal of our own vocabulary has contaminated our abil­
ity to let the actors build their own space, as many critiques have
charitably shown (Chateauraynaud, 1991; Lee and Brown, 1994).
This weakness on our part does not mean, however, that our
vocabulary was too poor, but that, on the contrary, it was not poor
enough and that designing a space for the actors to deploy their
own categories is a much harder task than we thought at first—and
this applies of course to this notion of deployment itself. From the
very beginning, ANT has been sliding in a sort of race to overcome
its limits and to drop from the list of its methodological terms any
which would make it impossible for new actors (actants in fact) to
define the world in their own terms, using their own dimensions and
touchstones. John Law and Annemarie Mol have used the word
fluid (Mol and Law, 1994), Adrian Cussins, the word trails (Cussins,
1992), Charis Cussins, the word choreography (Cussins, 1996). All
of these words designate in my view what the theory should be and
what the excessive diffusion of 'double-click' networks has rendered
irretrievable: it is a theory that says that by following circulations we
can get more than by defining entities, essence or provinces. In that
sense, ANT is merely one of the many anti-essentialist movements
that seems to characterize the end of the century. But it is also, like
ethnomethodology, simply a way for the social scientists to access
sites, a method and not a theory, a way to travel from one spot to
the next, from one field site to the next, not an interpretation of

20                            O The Editorial Board of The Sociological Review 1999
                                                       On recalling ANT

what actors do simply glossed in a different more palatable and
more universalist language.
    I have often compared it to perspective drawing (Latour, 1997),
 because of this peculiar relation between an empty construction
 that is nonetheless strictly determined but which has no other aim
 than disappearing once the picture is left to deploy its own space. I
 am well aware of the limits of this metaphor since there is hardly a
more constraining method than three dimensional perspectival
drawing! Yet the image has its advantage: ANT does not tell anyone
the shape that is to be drawn—circles or cubes or lines—but only
how to go about systematically recording the world-building abili-
ties of the sites to be documented and registered. In that sense, the
potentialities of ANT are still largely untapped, especially the politi-
cal implications of a social theory that would not claim to explain
the actors' behaviour and reasons, but only to find the procedures
which render actors able to negotiate their ways through one
another's world-building activity.
   The fourth and last nail in the coffin is the hyphen that relates
and distinguishes the two words 'actor' and 'network'. As I have
indicated above, it is an unfortunate reminder of the debate between
agency and structure into which we never wanted to enter. But it is
also a place holder for a much bigger problem, one that we have
become aware of only very slowly, and whose impact will be very
much felt in the future. By dealing simultaneously with human and
non-human agencies, we happened to fall into an empty space
between the four major concerns of the modernist way of thinking.
We were not conscious of this coherence at first, but learned it the
hard way when we began to understand that those who should have
been most interested in our work, that is social scientists, including
those of SSK (the Sociology of Scientific Knowledge), turned out to
be its harshest critics (Collins and Yearley, 1992; Bloor, 1998). Their
social explanation did not seem to us to hold water: the very defini-
tion of society was part of the problem not part of the solution.
How could that be possible, and how could sociology of science
trigger such entirely different research programs?
   ANT slowly drifted from a sociology of science and technology,
from a social theory, into another enquiry of modernity—some-
times called comparative, symmetrical, or monist anthropology
(Descola and Palsson, 1996). The difference between ANT and the
masses of reflection on modernity and post-, hyper-, pre- and anti-
modernity, was simply that it took to task all of the components of
what could be called the modernist predicament simultaneously.

OThe Editorial Board of The Sociological Review 1999                21
Bruno Latour

 The reason why it could not stick to a theory of social order is that
 the whole theory of society soon appeared to be enmeshed in a
 much more complex struggle to define an epistemological settle-
 ment about: (a) what the world is like outside without human inter-
 vention; (b) a psychology inside—an isolated subjectivity still able
 to also comprehend the word out there; (c) a political theory of how
 to keep the crowds at bay without them intervening with their
 unruly passions and ruining the social order; and finally (d) a rather
 repressed but very present theology that is the only way to guaran-
 tee the differences and the connections between those three other
 domains of reality. There is not one problem of deciding what soci-
 ety is, a second of explaining why there is a psychology, a third of
 defining politics, and a fourth of accounting for the deletion of the-
 ological interests. Instead there is only one single predicament
 which, no matter how entangled, has to be tackled at once. To sum
 it up in one simple formula: 'out there' nature, 'in there' psychology,
 'down there' politics, 'up there' theology. It is this whole package
 that by happenstance ANT called into question at once.
    There is no room here to review the whole question—I have done
 so elsewhere (Latour, 1999)—but only to indicate the consequences
 for one possible future of ANT. ANT is not a theory of the social,
 any more than it is a theory of the subject, or a theory of God, or a
 theory of nature. It is a theory of the space or fluids circulating in a
 non-modern situation. What type of connection can be established
 between those terms, other than the systematic modernist solution?
This is, I think, clearly the direction of what is 'after' ANT and
what would begin to solve a number of the worries expressed in the
contributions to this book.
    Let us not forget that the first thing we made circulate is nature
and reference, that is the 'out there' box. I was struck to see that
none of the writers, in this book or at the conference from which it
derived, mentioned social constructivism and the recent Science
Wars. Clearly the treatment of the collective of scientific reality as a
circulation of transformations—is it even necessary to say again
that reference is real, social and narrative at once?—is now, if not
taken for granted, at least clearly articulated. If ANT can be credited
with something, it is to have developed a science studies that entirely
bypasses the question of 'social construction' and the 'realist/
relativist debate'. It is not, it never was, a pertinent question, even
though it still amuses many people who are not familiar with either
science studies or ANT. Social theory is now allowed to have as
many points of contact, as many correspondences, with a bountiful

22                            O The Editorial Board of The Sociological Review 1999
                                                        On recalling ANT

 reality as there are circulating references. ANT can gorge itself on
 realities without having to spend a single moment excusing itself for
 not believing in an 'outside' reality. On the contrary, it is now able
 to explain why on earth the modernist had the bizarre idea of mak-
 ing reality 'outside'.
    What I call the 'second wave' of science studies has offered (is
 offering) the same sort of treatment to the other sphere—'in there'.
 Subjectivity, corporeality, is no more a property of humans, of indi-
 viduals, of intentional subjects, than being an outside reality is a
 property of nature. This new tack is so well represented in the
 papers in this book that there is no need to develop the point here
 (see the chapter by Annemarie Mol). Subjectivity seems also to be a
circulating capacity, something that is partially gained or lost by
 hooking up to certain bodies of practice. Madeleine Akrich's work,
the chapter by Emilie Gomart and Antoine Hennion for this book,
the work I am doing on ethnopsychiatry (Latour, 1996), the work of
Charis Cussins, the new book by Marc Berg and Annemarie Mol
(Berg and Mol, 1998), all have the character of, so to speak, redis-
tributing subjective quality outside—but of course, it is a totally dif-
ferent 'outside' now that epistemology has been turned into a
circulating reference. The two movements—the first and the second
wave, one on objectivity, the other on subjectivity—are closely
related: the more we have 'socialized' so to speak 'outside' nature,
the more 'outside' objectivity the content of our subjectivity can
gain. There is plenty of room now for both.
   What is next? Clearly the 'down there' aspect of the modernist
predicament, namely political theory as indicated by a small but
growing body of work (see work by Dick Pels). Not a single feature
of our definition of political practice escapes the pressure of episte-
mology ('out there') and psychology ('in there'). If we could elicit
the specificity of a certain type of circulation that is turning the
Body Politic into one, that is, some type of circulation that 'collects'
the collective, we would have made an immense step forward. We
would have at last freed politics from science—or more exactly from
epistemology (Latour, 1997)—a result that would be quite a feat for
people who are still often accused to have politicized science beyond
repair! From the recent work in political ecology, or in what Isabelle
Stengers call 'cosmopolitics' (Stengers, 1996; Stengers, 1997), I am
rather confident that this will soon come to fruition. The political
relevance that academics always search for, somewhat desperately,
cannot be obtained without a relocation of the extraordinary origi-
nality of political circulation.

O The Editorial Board of The Sociological Review 1999               23
Bruno Latour

   What about the half hidden sphere above, that has been used as a
guarantee for the rest of the modernist systems? I know this is a
very risky territory since if there is anything worse than dabbling
with non-humans, it is to take theology seriously. This line of work
is not represented at all, I agree, in this book. Yet, I think that it is
in theology that the notion of circulation is the most rewarding, pre-
cisely because it quickly rejuvenates a tissue of absurdities (what has
become a tissue of absurdities) because of the shadow cast by the
notion of a Science and by the notion of Society. Morality that
seems totally absent from the engineering dreams of ANT, may be
very abundant if we care to take it also for a certain type of circula-
tion.
   The point on which I want to conclude is somewhat different
from that of John Law. In his chapter, he asks us to limit ANT and
to tackle complexity and locality seriously and modestly. As with
several of us, he is somewhat terrified by the monster that we have
begot. But you cannot do to ideas what auto manufacturers do with
badly conceived cars: you cannot recall them all by sending adver-
tisements to the owners, retrofitting them with improved engines or
parts, and sending them back again, all for free. Once launched in
this unplanned and uncharted experiment in collective philosophy
there is no way to retract and once again be modest. The only solu-
tion is to do what Victor Frankenstein did not do, that is, not to
abandon the creature to its fate but continue all the way in develop-
ing its strange potential.
   Yes, I think there is life after ANT. Once we have strongly pushed
a stake into the heart of the creature safely buried in its coffin—thus
abandoning what is so wrong with ANT, that is 'actor', 'network',
'theory' without forgetting the hyphen!—some other creature might
emerge, light and beautiful: our future collective achievement.


References
Bauman, Z. (1992), Intimations ofPostmodernity. London: Routledge.
Berg, M. and A. Mol (1998) (eds), Differences in Medicine: Unravelling Practices,
  Techniques and Bodies, Durham, North Carolina: Duke University Press.
Bloor, D. (1998), 'Anti-Latour.' Studies in History and Philosophy of Science.
Callon, M. and B. Latour (1981), 'Unscrewing the Big Leviathan: How Do Actors
  Macrostmcture Reality'. Advances in Social Theory and Methodology. Toward an
  Integration of Micro and Macro Sociologies. K. Knorr and A. Cicourel. London:
  Routledge, 277-303.
Chateauraynaud, F. (1991), 'Forces et faiblesses de la nouvelle anthropologie des sci­
  ences.' Critique (529-530): 458-478.


24                                  C The Editorial Board of The Sociological Review 1999
                                                                 On recalling ANT

Collins, H. and S. Yearley (1992), 'Epistemological Chicken'. Science as Practice and
   Culture. A. Pickering. Chicago: Chicago University Press, 301-326.
Cussins, A. (1992), 'Content, Embodiment and Objectivity: The Theory of Cognitive
   Trails' Mind 101(404): 651-688.
Cussins, C. (1996), 'Ontological Choreography: Agency for Women Patients in an
   Infertility Clinic' Pages 166-201 in M. Berg and A. Mol, Differences in Medicine,
   Durham, N. Carolina: Duke University Press.
Czarniarwska, B. (1997), Narrating the Organization, Chicago: The University of
   Chicago Press.
Descola, P. and G. Palsson (eds) (1996), Nature and Society. Anthropological
   Perspectives. London: Routledge.
Latour, B. (1996), 'On Interobjectivity—with discussion by Marc Berg, Michael
   Lynch and Yrjo Engelström.' Mind, Culture and Activity 3(4): 228-245.
Latour, B. (1996), Petite riflexion sur le culte moderne des dieux Faitiches. Paris, Les
   Empecheurs de penser en rond.
Latour, B. (1997), 'Socrates' and Callicles' Settlement or the Invention of the
   Impossible Body Politic' Configurations Spring(2): 189-240.
Latour, B. (1997), "The Trouble with Actor Network Theory.' Soziale Welt 47:
   369-381.
Latour, B. (1999), Pandora's Hope. Essays on the reality of science studies.
   Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Latour, B. and E. Hermant (1998), Paris ville invisible. Paris, La Decouverte-Les
   Empecheurs de penser en rond.
Lee, N. and S. Brown (1994), 'Otherness and the Actor-Network: the Undiscovered
  Continent.' American Behavioral Scientist 37(6): 772-790.
Mol, A. and J. Law (1994), 'Regions, Networks, and Fluids: Anaemia and Social
  Topology.' Social Studies of Science 24(4): 641-672.
Power, M. (ed.) (1995), Accounting and Science: National Inquiry and Commercial
  Reason. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Stengers, I. (1996), Cosmopolitiques—Tome 1: la guerre des sciences. Paris, La decou-
  verte and Les Empecheurs de penser en rond.
Stengers, I. (1997), Power and Invention. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Taylor, J.R. (1993), Rethinking the Theory of Organizational Communication: How to
  Read an Organization. Norwood, New Jersey: Ablex Publishing.




O The Editorial Board of The Sociological Review 1999                               25
